Hello everyone in this lesson we will learn how to improve our blog posts to be more specific we will
learn three new techniques that will allow us to create more captivating blogs too by the end of this
lesson we will have answered the following questions.
Number one what is a featured image.
Number two what is the read more tag.
And number three what is an excerpt within the context of wordpress.
All right now at this point let's jump right into the action and begin answering those questions one
by one.
So here we are on my home page and the first thing that I'm going to do since this lesson is all about
blog posts is navigate to my travel page so my navigation menu I will click on travel.
All right.
And remember this page will show the most recent blog posts from the travel category.
So let's begin making a few improvements to this page.
So here we see the first post and then the second post and then the third post.
And currently this content looks a bit boring.
I think it would be better if we included a photograph for each post right about here now in previous
lessons we already learned how to add photographs within the content for a page or a post.
Now while that is certainly a valid way of adding photos to your content in this lesson I want to show
you a feature that WordPress has that will let us associate an image with a post so WordPress will create
a one to one relationship between a post and its image.
So for example for this trip to the Midwest post we can assign it a featured image and then WordPress
will use that featured image in relation to this post throughout our website.
If that explanation didn't make a whole lot of sense.
That's OK because at this point let me show you visually how to add a featured image.
So for example let's work on this trip to the Midwest post so I will use the top left link to go into
my admin dashboard within the sidebar I will click on posts to view a list of all of my posts.
Here we see trip to the Midwest so I will click on that to edit it all right.
Now your first instinct if you want to add a photo here might be to click into this main content field
and insert an image right here.
So maybe you would use the Add media button now that will technically work but I want to show you a
better way.
So let's leave this main content field alone and instead I want to direct your attention to the right
hand side of the screen.
So if I scroll down a bit actually if I scroll down all the way.
Notice in the very bottom right hand corner this box named featured image.
Let's click on the set featured image link.
I'm going to upload a new photo for this trip to the Midwest post so I will click on upload files.
And then click select files on my computer's desktop I have a folder named assets and then within that
folder I have a folder named travel for this blog post I'm going to use this photo of a field so I will
select that file
once it finishes uploading.
I will click Set featured image towards the bottom right corner and there we see it.
So at this point I'm going to scroll back up and click the blue update button.
And now let me jump back to my public front facing Web site.
This is the home page.
Let me jump back to the travel page OK so for the first post we see the title trip to the Midwest and
now we see the featured image.
Now at this point you might be wondering to yourself why didn't we just add the image within the main
content field for the post.
What's the point of using the featured image option instead of just inserting the image along with the
main content.
Well there are a few reasons.
So number one you'll notice that the content for this post lives in this column and the information
about the post.
So the date that it was posted on and the category that it lives in that information takes up this column.
So if we would have inserted this image into the main content field with this text then the image would
have lived in this column instead because we set this image to be the featured image our 2016 theme
or whatever theme you are using will be on the lookout for the featured image and it will use it in
special places in the lab.
So for example if we switched to a different theme instead of the 2016 theme perhaps the featured image
would be used as a smaller thumbnail right about here.
The idea is that every theme is different and it's up to the theme to use the featured image in a compelling
way.
Now let's get back to the task at hand.
My goal is to make this travel page look as nice as possible.
And currently I think this photo is a bit too tall.
I think it would look a lot nicer if this image used a really wide but not very tall landscape aspect
ratio.
Right.
Because that way we are still adding a bit of captivating imagery to the screen but the image won't
be as tall so it won't force users to scroll down as far just to begin reading the real content.
So to edit this feature image or I should say to crop the featured image.
I'm just going to jump back into my admin dashboard click on posts in the sidebar curious trip to the
Midwest.
Let me click that again.
Scroll down and look in the very bottom right corner for featured image.
And if I click on that image I can then look towards the top right corner and use this edit image option.
OK.
Now from this screen I can simply click and drag the portion of the image that I want to use.
All right so I'm happy with that selection.
Now to actually crop the image just use this first icon here.
OK so that cropped the image and now just click the blue save button.
Then be sure to look in the bottom right corner for set featured image perfect.
So now we can see the images cropped just the way we want it so that scroll back up and click Update
to truly save our changes.
And now if we jump back to our front facing web site let me click on travel perfect.
I think that looks pretty nice.
All right now at this point in the lesson we've learned what a featured image is next let's change gears
and learn about the read more tag.
So for example with our trip to the Midwest post maybe on the screen that lists multiple posts maybe
on this screen we only want to show the first couple of sentences of this text and then we want to include
a link right about here that says Click to read more.
And that link will take visitors to the detail or single view for just that one post.
Now this is a fairly simple feature to implement.
The only hard part is knowing where to look.
So let me show you.
So let me jump over to my admin dashboard and click on posts in the left hand side bar.
I want to edit trip to the Midwest so I will click on that all right and let's say after these few sentences.
So right here where the cursor is right now this is where I want to insert the read more link.
So with my cursor placed right there I can just go up to this menu and click on this icon that I'm selecting
right now.
If you hover over it it reads insert.
Read More tag OK.
And here we can see that it was successfully added to my post.
Now I'm going to save or update this post.
So in the right hand column click the blue update button.
Then I will jump back to my public facing Web site.
Click on travel perfect.
So we have our title our featured image and now we only see this little bit of text and if a visitor
is intrigued by this content they can click Continue reading link or they can click on the featured
image or the title.
So as an example I will click on continue reading WordPress even scrolls me down to the exact point
on the page where the read more insert tag was inserted.
I believe I was right about here but anyways here we are on the dedicated single post view for a trip
to the Midwest and if we look up in our address bar you can see that this is the detail screen for the
trip to the Midwest post.
All right.
So that's really all there is to the read more tag.
Once you know where to find that icon in the menu it's very simple to use.
So feel free to use that for any and all of your posts.
Ok so for a quick lesson recap.
So far we've addressed featured images the read more tag.
Next let's change gears and talk about excerpts as an example.
I will continue to edit the trip to the Midwest post so let's jump over to the admin area.
Click on posts here.
Trip to the Midwest.
Let's edit that one.
All right now by default WordPress does not show us the option to create an excerpt in order to begin
using excerpts.
We need to click this button towards the top right corner of the screen named screen options.
So if I click that this new menu area appears and here we see excerpt so go ahead and check the check
box right near the word excerpt and then to close this menu you can just click screen options which
is right about here.
Just click it one more time.
All right.
Now if we scroll down towards the bottom of the screen towards the bottom of the left hand column.
Here we see a box named excerpt.
Now I realize there's a good chance you have no idea what an excerpt is.
So let's find out by experimenting.
So within this box I will type.
This is an important snippet of text from the mid west trip post.
You get the idea.
You could type anything you want in this field and now if I scroll up and save or update this post and
then jump back to my public facing web site and click on travel.
Here we see the title of the post and here we see the excerpt.
Now remember every theme is different.
Now I'm using the 2016 theme and it chooses to display the excerpt right here but not every theme will
do this.
Each theme will style and position and use the excerpt differently in other themes.
When we fill out the excerpt field it might not display this normal text here at all and it might only
display the excerpt until you click Continue reading to view the full article.
So I know it's a bit tricky to wrap your head around what the excerpt really is because it's different
in every theme but in general the excerpt field is your chance to provide a catchy important part of
the post to catch people's eyes to get their attention or to summarize the post in an interesting fashion.
Also I will point out that even within a single theme the excerpt can be used in different ways on different
pages.
So for example on this category archive screen here we see in the excerpt used in a slightly larger
than average font.
However if I use my web site's search functionality and if I search for mid west there's only one result.
Obviously the trip to the Midwest blog post but now you'll notice that all we see is the title The featured
image and instead of the regular text here we see the XOR.
Only it's not styled like a sub headline any longer.
Now it just looks like standard small text.
So long story short.
Think of the excerpt field as your chance to summarize a post and that's actually going to bring this
lesson to a close to review.
We learned about featured images we learned about the read more tag.
And finally we learned about excerpts in our next lesson.
We will begin learning about comments comments allow visitors of your website to interact with you.
If you already know for a fact that you do not want commenting enabled on your website that's ok I will
show you how to disable comments.
But for a lot of people and a lot of Web sites the comments section can create a vibrant community.
Anyways there's a lot to be said about comments there's a lot to learn.
We're going to have a blast.
Let's keep things rolling.
And I will see you in the next lesson.